1.5.2 How DOES EVAPORATION CAUSE COOLING?

In an open vessel, the liquid keeps on evaporating. The particles of liquid absorb energy from the surrounding to regain the energy lost during evaporation. This absorption of energy from the surroundings make the surroundings cold.

What happens when you pour some acetone (nail polish remover) on your palm? The particles gain energy from your palm or surroundings and evaporate causing the palm to feel cool.

After a hot sunny day, people sprinkle water on the roof or open ground because the large latent heat of vaporisation of water helps to cool the hot surface.

Can you cite some more examples from daily life where we can feel the effect of cooling due to evaporation?

Why should we wear cotton clothes in summer?

During summer, we perspire more because of the mechanism of our body which keeps us cool. We know that during evaporation, the particles at the surface of the liquid gain energy from the surroundings or body surface and change into vapour. The heat energy equal to the latent heat of vaporisation is absorbed from the body leaving the body cool. Cotton, being a good absorber of water helps in absorbing the sweat and exposing it to the atmosphere for easy evaporation.

Why do we see water droplets on the outer surface of a glass containing ice-cold water?

Let us take some ice-cold water in a tumbler. Soon we will see water droplets on the outer surface of the tumbler. The water vapour present in air, on coming in contact with the cold glass of water, loses energy and gets converted to liquid state, which we see as water droplets.

uestions 1. Why does a desert cooler cool better on a hot dry day?

2. How does the water kept in.an earthen pot (matka) become cool during summer?

3. Why does our palm feel cold when we put some acetone or petrol or perfume on it?

4. Why are we able to sip hot tea or milk faster from a saucer rather thana cup?

5. What type of clothes should we wear in summer?

you have

° Matter is made up of small particles.

° The matter around us exists in three states—solid, liquid and gas.

° The forces of attraction between the particles are maximum in

° The spaces in between the constituent particles and kinetic energy of the particles are minimum in the case of solids, intermediate in liquids and maximum in gases.

The arrangement of particles is most ordered in the case of solids, in the case of liquids layers of particles can slip and slide over each other while for gases, there is no order, particles just move about randomly.

The states of matter are inter-convertible. The state of matter can be changed by changing temperature or pressure.

Sublimation is the change of solid state directly to gaseous state without going through liquid state.

Deposition is the change of gaseous state directly to solid state without going through liquid state.

Boiling is a bulk phenomenon. Particles from the bulk (whole) of the liquid change into vapour state.

Evaporation is a surface phenomenon. Particles from the surface gain enough energy to overcome the forces of attraction present in the liquid and change into the vapour state.

The rate of evaporation depends upon the surface area exposed to the atmosphere, the temperature, the humidity and the wind speed.

Evaporation causes cooling.

Latent heat of vaporisation is the heat energy required to change 1 kg of a liquid to gas at atmospheric pressure at its boiling point.

Latent heat of fusion is the amount of heat energy required to change 1 kg of solid into liquid at its melting point.

Some measurable quantities and their units to remember:

kelvin K metre m kilogram kg newton N cubic metre m? kilogram per cubic metre kg m* pascal Pa

(a) 293 K (b) 470 K . Convert the following temperatures to the kelvin scale. (a) 25°C (b) 373°C

- Give reason for the following observations.

(a) Naphthalene balls disappear with time without leaving any solid.

(b) We can get the smell of perfume sitting several metres away.

- Arrange the following substances in increasing order of forces of attraction between the particles— water, sugar, oxygen.

- What is the physical state of water at—

(a) 25°C (b) O° C (c) 100° C ? . Give two reasons to justify—

(a) water at room temperature is a liquid.

(b) an iron almirah is a solid at room temperature.

- Why is ice at 273 K more effective in cooling than water at the same temperature?

- What produces more severe burns, boiling water or steam?

- Name A,B,C,D,E and F in the following diagram showing change in its state

Prepare a model to demonstrate movement of particles in solids, liquids and gases.

For making this model you will need

° A transparent jar

° A big rubber balloon or piece of stretchable rubber sheet e A string

How to make?

° Put the seeds in the jar.

° Sew the string to the centre of the rubber sheet and put some tape to keep it tied securely.

° Stretch and tie the rubber sheet on the mouth of the jar.

° Your model is ready. Now run your fingers up and down the string by first tugging at it slowly and then rapidly.

Pull the string first slowly, then vigorously to show movement of particles as in solids, liquids and gases.

Big balloon or rubber sheet

Fig. 1.10: A model for converting of solid to liquid and liquid to gas.